Usually,
the language that we learned
from infancy becomes
the language of the heart,
and we learn it at home.
In most cases, the dominant influence
in our life in connection
with our language of the heart,
or the first language, is our mother.
And that’s precisely what took place
in Israel in the days of Nehemiah.
But the mothers in this case were pagans
sharing their language and probably
their beliefs with their children.
And a lot of Jewish men
—prominent Jewish men—
had married pagan women.
Let’s read the scripture together
at Nehemiah 13:23, 24
—Nehemiah 13:23, 24.
It says: “In those days I also saw Jews
“who had married Ashdodite, Ammonite,
“and Moabite women.
“Half of their sons were speaking Ashdodite
“and half spoke the language
of the different peoples,
“but none of them
knew how to speak the language of the Jews.”
And as was stated,
it’s very likely that those mothers
would be teaching the children
about their land, their culture,
their worship,
and the pagan gods they worshipped.
And so the decision was made
by the Jews themselves,
when they were counseled and given direction
from Ezra and from Nehemiah,
to send those wives away
along with the children.
And that’s an interesting thing.
It must have been a bit difficult
for some husbands to see
their children sent away.
But all they knew were
the languages of the pagan wives
—nothing about Hebrew
and the worship of Jehovah God.
And the problem was
that they were sent away to keep the Jews
from losing their identity
by a gradual assimilation into the cultures
and the religions of the surrounding nations
that those wives belonged to.
In Nehemiah’s day, speaking Hebrew was vital,
and we’re grateful it’s not necessary today.
We all don’t have to learn Hebrew.
But in his wisdom, Jehovah
invites people who speak any language
to learn the “pure language,”
the truth about him and his purposes.
And, you know, it’s a bit like the opposite
of what took place at the Tower of Babel,
where Jehovah intervened and confused
the builders of the Tower of Babel,
imposing upon them different languages,
including different ways of thinking.
And so they went off disorganized
and separated from one another.
And today, we have people
from all over the world
who speak many, many different languages,
but in Jehovah’s wisdom,
he’s bringing them all together
—those who love the truth and love him—
in unity.
And this is what Zephaniah says
—Zephaniah 3:9.
It speaks of the “pure language”:
“I shall give to peoples
the change to a pure language,
in order for them all
to call upon the name of Jehovah.”
And that’s what these people do
who speak other languages.
We reach them with the truth,
but then they’re unified
with Jehovah’s organization,
because it goes on to say
“in order to serve him
shoulder to shoulder.”
So isn’t that interesting—the way Jehovah
has used the “pure language”
to bring people of many diverse backgrounds
and languages together in his worship?
In our day,
people of many different languages
are leaving their home countries
to live elsewhere.
And it’s really quite amazing
when you consider:
Large cities are filled with people
of different languages,
and even in little villages,
we find people speaking different languages.
They need help to learn the truth
in the language of their heart.
It’s interesting to note how many Bethelites
have learned other languages
in order to teach the truth to people.
In the United States Bethel, in our branch,
there are over 2,500 Bethelites
who are engaged
in 24 different language groups
and congregations.
So a lot of Bethelites (and commuters
are included in those numbers)
are doing a very fine work
in helping people
in the territory to learn the truth.
And wouldn’t it be nice— I know some of us
would love to learn some other languages
—wouldn’t it be lovely
if we could learn the way a child does?
They just absorb it
—no effort—
and they start speaking it.
A researcher, Dr. John Brierley, says this:
“‘Clearly the young brain seems
“to be programmed almost like a computer’
“for language development.
“He notes that even ‘brain anatomy’ suggests
“‘that an infant is born
with a pre-programmed
biological capacity to speak.’”
And then the comment in Awake!  said
that it’s as though the brain is hardwired
to learn language.
I’m sorry to say that as the years go by,
the hardwiring starts
to fray a bit in many of us.
But if we make the effort
and we do make a switch to a congregation
where they speak the language
that you would like to learn, remember this:
Children can be
a big help in the congregation
that you attend in a foreign language.
They can also be very startling and frank:
“You speak funny.
“Why can’t you pronounce that word properly?
It’s so easy.”
‘Well, yes, to you  it’s easy.
You were raised with it.’
But that’s how kids are.
They don’t realize the difficulties we have
as we get older,
with the grooves being so deep
and so thick in the brain
with our original language
that it’s hard to get out
of those grooves the vowels and consonants
that we’re not used
to saying in a certain order.
Keep a sense of humor; listen to the kids.
They’ll help you.
And don’t be overly concerned
about speaking a new language
without an accent.
Everybody has an accent one way or another.
Some are more agreeable than others,
but everyone has that.
And some don’t want to admit it,
but they really do.
They have an accent.
Even when we all speak the same language,
you can tell where a person is from
—whether it’s east, north, west
(whatever it may be), south.
There are accents or intonations
in the way words are pronounced.
I remember, in years gone by,
for missionaries
who were sent out into the field,
we had to follow a special program
in learning a new language.
Your first month in your new assignment,
you had to study 11 hours a day
for 30 days your new language.
Well, you felt like you were
in the Tower of Babel
on those occasions
because it was very difficult.
The second month,
you had to study your new language
four hours a day
and be out preaching 130 hours.
Your third month
was 150 hours in the field ministry,
and you’d study the language as you could.
For those who are striving
to learn a new language,
here are a few suggestions I gleaned
from the Awake!  of March 2007
and the January issue of 2000.
There are four points:
(1) motivation,
(2) humility,
(3) patience,
(4) practice.
“Motivation.
You need an incentive
—a reason to pursue your goal.”
Because if you have
a high level of motivation,
you’re going to be more successful.
Well, we have the best motivation there is:
teach people the truth;
praise our God, Jehovah;
build up the congregation
we’ve chosen to attend.
What about humility?
Well, “don’t expect too much of yourself”
when you start learning a new language.
“Mistakes are inevitable.”
And if you wait
until you can speak it perfectly
before you start making
comments or give a talk,
you may be waiting quite a while.
Be prepared, because it may not be
until after Armageddon
that you achieve that goal.
So don’t be afraid to make mistakes
and carry on with your new language.
‘Patience.
‘A brother stated: “For me,
the first two years were difficult,
‘and at times I felt like giving up.”
‘Still, he acknowledges
that it does get easier as time goes by.’
And it gets enjoyable.
And number four: “Practice.
“A regular routine will help you
to become fluent in [your] new language.
“Try to practice every day,
even if it’s for just a few minutes.
“[There’s an interesting saying]
As one textbook puts it,
“‘“A little and often”
is preferable to “a lot but seldom.”’”
So be steady,
even for short periods of time,
in practicing the new language.
Now, the fact is
that most Bethelites in our branch
are serving in the English-language field,
and they are truly a blessing
to their congregations.
The brothers are happy
to have Bethelites who take the lead,
who give of themselves, and who work hard
to build up the congregation.
So the decision to serve
in an English congregation
or with a different language group
is highly personal.
Whatever the decision may be,
there’s a key factor
that we all have to keep in mind
to maintain our spirituality at a high level
and give our Bethel assignment our best.
And that key factor
that we have to keep in mind
is to focus on the one language
that counts the most
—the “pure language” that Jehovah God
has given to his people.